---+OpenLink Software Statement of Privacy

This document was last updated May 30th, 2002.

At OpenLink Software, we are committed to protecting your privacy and providing the most secure online experience. You can travel through much of our site without giving us any information about yourself. But in certain circumstances we do need information to provide services that you request, and this statement of privacy explains data collection and use in those situations. Please read the complete OpenLink Software privacy statement.


---++Collecting your Personal Information
OpenLink Software uses cookies to retain your Personal profile details during the registration process. These cookies allow you to access certain services from the OpenLink Web Site, by signing in with your e-mail address and a password. Once you register, your profile is created.

When someone registers at the OpenLink Software Web Site, a cookie is placed on the customer's machine (if the customer accepts cookies) or is read if the customer has registered at the site previously and requested that cookies be used to Log In.

The use of these cookies is required for full access to the OpenLink Web Site. All information stored in these cookies is encrypted. Additionally, sensitive information, such as credit card numbers are never stored in cookies.

For example: If you choose to make a purchase in the Shop area of the Web site, we will request personal information such as: name, address, telephone number, credit card number and shipping information.

If you choose to not have your browser accept cookies from the OpenLink Software Web site you will be able to access certain sections of the site but be restricted in others.

---++Access to your Personal Information

If you ever want to review or update your profile, simply go to the Login page, choose to Update your Profile and proceed to edit your personal details. We'll ask you to disclose your OpenLink Login Details (e-mail address and password) so that only you can access your profile.

---++Use of your Personal Information

We use your personal information for two primary purposes:

To make the site easier for you to use by not making you enter your personal information more than once in our Download, Online Shop and Technical Support areas.
To alert you to product upgrades, special offers, updated information and other new services from OpenLink.


---++Control of your Personal Information

When you register, or otherwise give us personal information, OpenLink Software will not share that information with third parties. It will only be used for the purposes stated above.


---++Security of your Personal Information

OpenLink Software strictly protects the security of your personal information and honors your choices for its intended use. We carefully protect your data from loss, misuse, unauthorized access or disclosure, alteration, or destruction.

Your personal information is never shared outside the company without your permission. Inside the company, data is stored in password-controlled servers with limited access. Your information may be stored and processed in the United States or any other country where OpenLink, its subsidiaries, or agents are located.

You also have a significant role in protecting your information. No one can see or edit your personal information without knowing your e-mail address and password, so do not share these with others.

---++Changes to this Statement

OpenLink Software is sensitive to user's privacy issues and recognizes the need to update this policy as new features and business services are offered on OPENLINKSW.com. OpenLink Software reserves the right to amend the privacy policy at any time with or without notice. Please check back frequently in the event of changes to our Privacy Policy. When we do update the policy, we will also revise the "last updated" date at the top of the privacy statement.

---++Contact Information
OpenLink Software welcomes your comments regarding this Statement of Privacy, please contact us by e-mailing privacy@openlinksw.com, or by postal mail at the address below.
<verbatim>
OpenLink Software, Inc.
10 Burlington Road
Suite 265
Burlington
MA01803
USA
</verbatim>