
= doc.Index.index.stbenefits

%TOC%

   
High-Performance 32 Bit ODBC, JDBC, ADO.NET and OLE-DB Drivers that provide transparent access to remote databases from any compliant application. These include Desktop Productivity Tools such as Spreadsheets, Word Processors, J2EE applications, Client & Application Server Application Development Environments, Web based Database Publishing Tools and Computer Telephony Integration packages are just a few of the many products that can take advantage of our standards compliance. 

These drivers conform to the common perception of what an ODBC or JDBC drivers actually is; a single component installed on the desktop or workstation machine – only. Once installed it provides connectivity to local or remote databases. 

The Single-Tier driver is a Client-Only installation. Thus, it’s only installed on the client machine hosting the database independent (ODBC, JDBC, OLE DB, or ADO.NET) application that it serves. A client machine does not have to be a desktop or workstation, it also be a middle tier application server, or the actual machine that hosts the back-end database. 

Single-Tier driver installations assume the pre-installation of database vendor provided networking middleware. It is also assumed that this middleware is functional to the point where you are able to establish remote database connectivity with your remote target database - prior to downloading and installing Single-Tier Drivers. Thus, the process of installing the Single-Tier driver is nothing more than completing the installation process, and then configuring a connection to your target database. 

These drivers match and in many cases surpass the performance of proprietary native drivers. 

ISV and OEM partners prefer this format of driver due to its ease of integration with their product installer packages, and the reduce installation and configuration complexity -- as there are no server side installations which may increase the perceived complexity of their product. 

Database Administrators naturally prefer this format of driver as it requires no perceived interference with back-end databases under their responsibility – as installation and configuration matters go. 


----
  